---
date: 2020-06-15
path: /Drafts/DataTrespass-PCA.md

title: 'Workers Un-Gagged'
subtitle: 'Federal Labor Pre-Emption of State Data Trespass Laws'
header: 'Data Trespass and Labor Pre-Emption'

author:
  - name: Eric M. Fink
    position: Associate Professor of Law
    affiliation: Elon Law School 
    address: Greensboro, North Carolina
    email: efink@elon.edu
    thanks: Thanks to Elon Law student Rachel Stariha (J.D. 2018) for her valuable research assistance.

output: 
  word_document
---

# The NCPPA Subjects Employees to Liability for Conduct that is Protected Under Federal Labor Law 

The NCPPA expressly targets employee activity.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }; see also @{ | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Some Ag-Gag statutes also specifically apply to employee activity. See CITES. Others would implicitly apply to employees engaged in the types of activity generally subject to liability. CITES.] Most notably, this includes unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises.^[See Part 3.1.1] It may also include union "salting",^[See Part 3.1.3] communicating with co-workers and the public about working conditions,^[See Part 3.1.3] and providing information and evidence about possible legal violations to federal agencies.^[See Part 3.1.4]  These activities are (at least in some circumstances) protected under federal labor law.

As a threshold matter, the protections of federal labor law apply only to those who fit within the statutory definition of an employee. Certain employees are excluded from coverage, notably federal, state, and local government workers,^[29 U.S.C. § 152(2).] supervisors^[29 U.S.C. § 152(3).] and managers,^[NLRB v. Bell Aerospace Co., 416 U.S. 267, 289 (1974).] railway and airline employees^[The Railway Labor Act, 45 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., covers labor relations in these industries.], domestic service workers,^[NLRA, 29 U.S.C. § 152(3).] and agricultural laborers.[^1]

[^1]: 29 U.S.C. § 152(3). While this exclusion might appear to alleviate any conflict with traditional ag-gag laws, that is not necessarily the case. The agricultural laborer exclusion applies only to those engaged directly in farming, { | Bud Antle, Inc. v. Barbosa, 45 F. 3d 1261 1994 | | | zu:21885:RYR9H9K5 } at 1274, quoting { | Camsco Produce Co., 297 NLRB 905 1990 | | | zu:21885:N2IBSXQE }, or who "perform tasks which are incidental to or in conjunction with [the employer's] farming operations," { | Bud Antle, Inc. v. Barbosa, 45 F. 3d 1261 1994 | | | zu:21885:RYR9H9K5 } at 1274, citing { | Camsco Produce Co., 297 NLRB 905 1990 | | | zu:21885:N2IBSXQE }, such as "processing agricultural products … grown on the premises of the farm itself." { | NLRB v. Cal-Maine Farms, Inc., 998 F. 2d 1336 1993 | | | zu:21885:6IVMTNST }. However, it does not apply to those who are not employed by a "farmer", See { | Bud Antle, Inc. v. Barbosa, 45 F. 3d 1261 1994 | | | zu:21885:RYR9H9K5 } at 1274 (agricultural laborer exclusion does not apply to employees of vegetable cooling and packing facility where employer did not grow vegetables itself but purchased them from independent growers); { | NLRB v. Monterey County B. & C. Trades Council, 335 F. 2d 927 1953 | | | zu:21885:KS9BFGUA } (agricultural laborer exclusion does not apply to employees of contractor hired to construct buildings and install equipment on poultry farm),  or who process, distribute, or otherwise handle agricultural goods other than those grown or raised by the employer for use in its own farming operations. { | Holly Farms Corp. v. NLRB, 517 US 392 1966 | | | zu:21885:YS6DZ8DM } (employees who collect live chickens from independent growers and deliver them to employer's processing plant not excluded); { | Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 US 298 1977 | | | zu:21885:YXTQRF45 } (truck drivers who deliver poultry feed produced at employer's mill to independent poultry farms under contract with employer not excluded); { | NLRB v. Cal-Maine Farms, Inc., 998 F. 2d 1336 1993 | | | zu:21885:6IVMTNST } (egg processing facility employees who regularly handle products purchased by employer from outside sources not excluded); { | Camsco Produce Co., 297 NLRB 905 1990 | | | zu:21885:N2IBSXQE } (mushroom processing facility employees who regularly handle products purchased by employer from outside sources not excluded).

	In contrast, ag-gag laws define agricultural facilities more broadly, to include not just farms but also other operations along the production, processing, and distribution chain. See, e.g. { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } §§ 18-7042(2)(a) & (b) (defining "Agricultural production" and "Agricultural production facility" to include "Construction, expansion, use, maintenance and repair of an agricultural production facility," "Processing and packaging agricultural products, including the processing and packaging of agricultural products into food and other agricultural commodities," and "Manufacturing animal feed," along with activity more directly connected to raising crops and animals.); accord { | 2002 | | | zu:21885:LWIYUCX5 }; { | 2004 | | | zu:21885:G5BMRLNT }; { | 2006 | | | zu:21885:MQTF7G4J }; { | 2012 | | | zu:21885:RMYY566N }; { | 2012 | | | zu:21885:X8E4LY7G }. Consequently, the NLRA protects at least some employees of agricultural facilities covered by ag-gag laws. 



## Protected Activity Under the NLRA

The NLRA protects "the right to self-organization, to form, join or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purposes of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection …."^[{ | 1935 | | | zu:21885:RE4VMPJN } sec. 157.] 



### Recording & Other Data Collection

Protected concerted activity may include taking photos or making audio or video recordings of conditions, communications, or events in the workplace. An employer may not adopt broad rules prohibiting or requiring permission for such activity.^[{ | Whole Foods Market, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 87 2015 | | | zu:21885:KALDMEZA }; { | T-Mobile, USA, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 171 2016 | | | zu:21885:LCUJNFWM }; { | Caesars Entertainment d/b/a Rio All-Suites Hotel & Casino, 362 N.L.R.B. No. 190 2015 | | | zu:21885:NXLTWSCV }; { | White Oak Manor, 353 N.L.R.B. 795 2009 | | | zu:21885:D3FI25HF }, fn. 2, 798-799 (finding that photography was part of the res gestae of employee's protected concerted activity in documenting inconsistent enforcement of employer dress code); { | Sullivan, Long & Hagerty, 303 N.L.R.B. 1007 1991 | | | zu:21885:SNEU99KV }, 1013 (finding employee's use of tape recorder in workplace to aid federal government investigation to be protected).] Employers may adopt and enforce more narrowly-tailored rules to protect other legally-recognized interests.^[@{ | Flagstaff Medical Center, Inc., 357 N.L.R.B. 659 2011 | | | zu:21885:C2CHH39V } (holding rule prohibiting "use of cameras for recording images of patients and/or hospital equipment, property, or facilities" did not unlawfully restrain or chill employees in the exercise of their Section 7 rights, where employer "has a significant interest in preventing the wrongful disclosure of individually identifiable health information" to protect patient privacy.] 

Determining whether an employer's rule is sufficiently-tailored or unduly-broad is precisely the sort of question that federal labor pre-emption declares to be exclusively the province of the NLRB and the federal courts. State law may not authorize employers to impose restrictions that restrain or interfere with protected concerted activity under the NLRA. Nor may state courts, whether in a civil or criminal action under a state data trespass law, adjudicate whether an employer's rule is overbroad under the NLRA. 

Employees may also use "surreptitious" or otherwise unauthorized recordings as evidence in administrative or judicial proceedings to vindicate their legal rights.^[{ | Whole Foods Market, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 87 2015 | | | zu:21885:KALDMEZA }, citing { | Times-Herald Record, 334 N.L.R.B. 350 2001 | | | zu:21885:MMDEZY8V }, 354; { | Painting Co., 330 N.L.R.B. 1000 2000 | | | zu:21885:I5VJYWVJ }, 1003; { | Arrow Flint Electric Co., 321 N.L.R.B. 1208 1996 | | | zu:21885:BFU9X8WX }, 1219; { | Wellstream Corp., 313 N.L.R.B. 698 1994 | | | zu:21885:TVZKM4WQ }, 711; { | McAllister Bros., 278 N.L.R.B. 601 1986 | | | zu:21885:N7889KP7 }, fn. 2, 605 fn. 3; { | Algreco Sportswear Co., 271 N.L.R.B. 499 1984 | | | zu:21885:LE7HHA5C }}, 505; { | East Belden Corp., 239 N.L.R.B. 776 1978 | | | zu:21885:HRG3Q7VN }, 782; { | California Acrylic Industries, Inc., 322 N.L.R.B. 41 1996 | | | zu:21885:TTELRVFT }.] 

### Salting

The NCPPA imposes liability on unauthorized data collection or recording by "An employee who enters the nonpublic areas of an employer's premises _for a reason other than a bona fide intent of seeking or holding employment_ or doing business with the employer."^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } (b)(1) & (2) (emphasis supplied).] Some Ag-Gag laws similarly target those who gain entry to the premises under the guise of seeking employment.^[See, e.g., { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } (imposing liability on one who "Obtains employment with an agricultural production facility by force, threat, or misrepresentation with the intent to cause economic or other injury").] 

Such "employment fraud" provisions could be construed to apply to union "salts", union members who take jobs at non-union workplaces with the aim of organizing the employees.^[See { | Dall, & Cohen, 2002 | | | zu:21885:G4RJX5EZ }; see also { | Forman, 2017 | | | zu:21885:AEIRA4CW } (reviewing the history and practice of salting and describing the author's own experience as a salt); { | Walsh, 2016 | | | zu:21885:S65JNTE5 }.] Salts sometimes identify themselves as union members and organizers when applying for jobs,^[See, e.g., { | Aerotek, Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 2018 | | | zu:21885:AQRQ4WQN }; { | Fluor Daniel, Inc., 311 N.L.R.B. 498 1993 | | | zu:21885:GNA2MHY7 }.] but sometimes keep their affiliation and motive covert.^[See, e.g., { | Lam, 2016 | | | zu:21885:DVGDFWUW } (describing experience as a covert salt).] In the latter circumstance, the employer may very well regard the concealment as a misrepresentation. Employers wishing to avoid unions no doubt regard salting as harmful to their economic interests.^[The view that salting is a devious practice causing economic harm to employers is reflected in a congressional hearing on alleged "salting abuses". { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP }. In his opening statement, subcommittee chair Rep. Sam Johnson contended that "Certain unions use 'salts' to cause deliberate harm to businesses by increasing their costs and forcing them to spend time, energy, and money to defend themselves against frivolous charges, and sometimes, to run employers out of business." { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP } at 2. A parade of employer witnesses then gave  anguished testimony about the alleged harms they suffered as a result of salting campaigns. { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP } at ??. In similar vein, a "Fact Sheet" in support of proposed legislation to outlaw salting, issued by a prominent anti-union organization, decried the practice as "an organized conspiracy on the part of Big Labor bosses" and "an instrument of economic destruction aimed at non-union companies". { | National Right to Work Committee, 2003 | | | zu:21885:PQP98FXM } at ??. See also, { | Johnson, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8S6SZKI9 } (discussing legislative efforts to reverse Town & Country and outlaw salting).] 

 Employee protections under the NLRA apply to those engaged in salting,^[{ | NLRB v. Town & Country Elec., Inc., 516 U.S. 85 1995 | | | zu:21885:Q84NCT42 } (holding job applicants' motive in seeking employment as part of union salting campaign did not deprive them of protection as statutory employee under NLRA)], whether overt or covert,^[CITES] as long as they are "genuinely interested in seeking to establish an employment relationship with the employer."^[{ | Toering Electric Co., 351 N.L.R.B. 225 2007 | | | zu:21885:VKGU4EEG }; see also { | Johnson, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8S6SZKI9 } (discussing narrowed protection for salts under Toering Electric and Oil Capitol Sheet Metal)] MIGHT BE OK IF LIABILITY UNDER NCPPA & OTHER STATE LAWS IS LIMITED TO THOSE WHO OBTAIN EMPLOYMENT FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF CAUSING INJURY, OR WITH NO BONA FIDE INTEREST IN THE JOB ITSELF. NOTE AMBIGUITY IN LANGUAGE OF NCPPA. 

There might still be problems in relation to other federal employment laws. For example, the use of "tester" applicants is a common practice for identifying discriminatory hiring practices. CITES COURTS HAVE UPHELD THE PRACTICE EVEN WHERE THE TESTERS HAVE NO REAL INTEREST IN THE JOB.] BUT AS WRITTEN, THESE STATUTES AT LEAST PLAUSIBLY COVER THOSE WITH MIXED MOTIVES, WHO WOULD BE REGARDED AS STATUTORY EMPLOYEES UNDER THE NLRA. THIS IS PARTICULARLY TRUE OF THE NORTH CAROLINA STATUTE, WHICH EXPLICITLY IDENTIFIES THOSE SUBJECT TO LIABILITY AS "EMPLOYEES" AND FURTHER PREDICATES THEIR LIABILITY ON USE OF THE INFORMATION OR RECORDING "TO BREACH THE PERSON'S DUTY OF LOYALTY TO THE EMPLOYER". 

### Communication with Co-Workers & Public

Employees under the NLRA also have a right to communicate with co-workers and the public about working conditions and disputes.^[{ | Albertsons, Inc., 351 N.L.R.B. 254 2007 | | | zu:21885:SWRLLWB5 }; { | Kinder-Care Learning Centers, Inc., 299 N.L.R.B. 1171 1990 | | | zu:21885:MM6TUGEB }.] 

### Providing Information and Evidence to Federal Agencies

THE NLRA PROTECTS THE RIGHT OF EMPLOYEES TO FILE REPRESENTATION PETITIONS AND COMPLAINTS OF UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES WITH THE NLRB AND TO TESTIFY AT NLRB PROCEEDINGS. 

By impairing the ability of employees to document workplace conditions and activity, the NCPPA undermines the NLRB's procedures for vindicating employee's rights under the NLRA.^[The NCPPA and other data trespass laws similarly undermine the enforcement of other federal laws that protect employees against health and safety hazards, discrimination, wage theft, and other harmful and abusive employment practices,  Employers are hardly likely to grant employees permission to collect evidence of such violations, and may very well attempt to cover up the problems if alerted that employees are planning to do so. Consequently, to substantiate claims of unlawful working conditions or employer conduct, employees must frequently take photos, make audio-video recordings, or copy documents without the employer's knowledge and consent.^[UFW Amicus Brief] 

NCPPA EXEMPTS DISCLOSURES TO STATE OFFICIALS FROM LIABILITY. BUT NOT DISCLOSURES TO FEDERAL OFFICIALS. 

## Disloyalty Under the NLRA 

Concerted activity may lose protection under the NLRA where it 




