---
date: 15 June 2020 
path: /Drafts/DataTrespass-Introduction.md

title: 'Workers Un-Gagged'
subtitle: 'Federal Labor Pre-Emption of State Data Trespass Laws'
header: 'Data Trespass and Labor Pre-Emption'

author:
  - name: Eric M. Fink
    position: Associate Professor of Law
    affiliation: Elon Law School 
    address: Greensboro, North Carolina
    email: efink@elon.edu
    thanks: Thanks to Elon Law student Rachel Stariha (J.D. 2018) for her valuable research assistance.

abstract: The North Carolina Property Protection Act creates a civil cause of action against "Any person who intentionally gains access to the nonpublic areas of another's premises and engages in an act that exceeds the person's authority to enter those areas …". The statute specifically targets employees who engage in unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises. At least some of the employee activity subject to civil liability under these statutes is protected under federal labor and employment laws. The Supremacy Clause dictates that this conflict must be resolved in favor of federal law. To ensure that the prospect of costly litigation and damages does not penalize employees for, or deter them from, exercising their rights under federal law, pre-emption should apply to any NCPPA claims arising from employee conduct that is even arguably protected. 

keywords: ag-gag, data trespass, labor, preemption

epigraph:
  - text: Progress is born of agitation. It is agitation or stagnation.
    by: Eugene V. Debs
    source: The Issue (1908)

output:
  custom_document:
    path: DataTrespass-Draft.odt

---

# Introduction

The North Carolina Property Protection Act ("NCPPA")^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } ("NCPPA").] creates a civil cause of action against "Any person who intentionally gains access to the nonpublic areas of another's premises and engages in an act that exceeds the person's authority to enter those areas …".^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }.] The statute specifically targets employees who engage in unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises.^[ { | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }.]

While sometimes described as an "Ag-Gag" law,^[See, e.g., { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } (discussing the NCPPA as an example of second-wave Ag-Gag laws)], the NCPPA represents a new approach to state laws against data trespass,^[CITE FOR "DATA TRESPASS". In this article, I use the term data trespass to include both traditional Ag-Gag laws and broader state laws like the NCPPA and the Arkansas statute] i.e. entering and collecting data on private property without the owner's permission.^[Shortly after the enactment of the NCPPA, Arkansas adopted a nearly-identical statute. { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Another recent entrant to the data trespass field is Wyoming. See { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:YPRFJBFW } (imposing criminal liability); { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:J7AWHBBX } (imposing civil liability). The Wyoming statutes are sui generis, particularly in their specific targeting of "resource data" collection. _See_ { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:YPRFJBFW } § (h)(iii) and { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:J7AWHBBX } § (e)(iv) (defining "resource data" as "data relating to land or land use, including but not limited to data regarding agriculture, minerals, geology, history, cultural artifacts, archaeology, air, water, soil, conservation, habitat, vegetation or animal species.").] It differs from earlier Ag-Gag laws in three significant respects.^[See Part 2 (providing an overview of the NCPPA).] First, while Ag-Gag laws apply only to agricultural facilities,^[See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }, 1332 ], the NCPPA applies more broadly to any private property, regardless of the type of facility or operation.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } (imposing liability for unauthorized activity in "the nonpublic areas of another's premises", without limitation as to the nature or use of the property.). The Arkansas statute applies only to "commercial property", defined to include any "business property", "Agricultural or timber production operations", and "Residential property used for business purposes". { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 } 16-118-1131(a)(1).]. Second, while earlier Ag-Gag laws typically impose criminal liability for prohibited activity,^[See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }, 1332 ], the NCPPA permits the property owner to bring a civil action for trespass against those engaged in unauthorized data collection.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } ("NCPPA"); see also Arkansas { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }; { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } (distinguishing North Carolina & Arkansas statutes from previous Ag-Gag laws on this basis).] Third, unlike prevous Ag-Gag laws, the NCPPA exclusively targets unauthorized recording and other data collection by employees.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }; see also { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Some earlier Ag-Gag statutes contain specific provisions aimed at so-called "employment fraud" for the purpose of gaining access to an agricultural facility. See, e.g., { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } (imposing liability on one who "Obtains employment with an agricultural production facility by force, threat, or misrepresentation with the intent to cause economic or other injury"), but otherwise generally apply to anyone engaged in the activities prohibited. See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }.]

This third distinctive feature of the NCPPA is the focus of this article. At least some of the employee activity subject to civil liability under the NCPPA is protected under federal labor and employment laws.^[See Part 3 (discussing protection under federal law of employee conduct subject to liability under the NCPPA and other state data trespass and Ag-Gag laws).] The Supremacy Clause dictates that this conflict must be resolved in favor of federal law under the pre-emption doctrine.^[See Part 4 (reviewing pre-emption of state law under federal labor and employment law).]

The NCPPA and other data trespass laws have faced legal challenges, primarily on Constitutional grounds.^[{ | People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals v. Stein, 737 Fed. Appx. 122 2018 | | | zu:21885:RC55NET5 } reversing and remanding { | People for Ethical Treatment of Animals v. Stein, 259 F. Supp. 3d 369 2017 | | | zu:21885:QIKJR77V }; see also { | Animal League Defense Fund v. Vaught, Dist. Court, 2020 | | | zu:21885:TS9ZMS4R } (Arkansas data trespass)). An appeal from the dismissal of the Arkansas is currently pending. Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Vaught, No. 20-1538 (8th Cir. filed March 16, 2020) { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Kelly, 2020 WL 362626 2020 | | | zu:21885:R9QDV5WY } (Kansas Ag-Gag) { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Reynolds, 297 F. Supp. 3d 901 2018 | | | zu:21885:BFGPTVNS } (Iowa Ag-Gag); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Wasden, 878 F. 3d 1184 2018 | | | zu:21885:P485J6LL } (Idaho Ag-Gag); { | Western Watersheds Project v. Michael, 869 F. 3d 1189 2017 | | | zu:21885:58AV2WSQ } (Wyoming data trespass); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Herbert, 263 F. Supp. 3d 1193 Dist. Court, 2017 | | | zu:21885:TJAF5D6J } (Utah Ag-Gag).] However, the courts in those cases have not addressed the issue of federal pre-emption.^[In { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter, 118 F. Supp. 3d 1195 2015 | | | zu:21885:BA3FE9UI }, the plaintiffs asserted that the Idaho Ag-Gag statute was pre-empted under non-labor federal law. See Complaint at 46-48 (asserting pre-emption under the False Claims Act, Food Safety & Modernization Act, and Clean Water Act.). On appeal, an amicus brief by the United Farm Workers union argued that the statute would undermine employee protections under federal law. UFW Amicus Brief at 7-29.  Another amicus brief by the Idaho Building Trades Council and state AFL-CIO specifically argued for pre-emption under the NLRA. { | anon. Amicus Curae Brief of the Idaho Building Trades Council and the Idaho AFL-CIO, in Support of Appellee and for Affirmance, 2016 | | | zu:21885:JI4EU8UK } at 4-13. However, neither the District Court nor the Court of Appeals reached these issues. See { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter, 118 F. Supp. 3d 1195 2015 | | | zu:21885:BA3FE9UI } (granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiffs on other grounds); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Wasden, 878 F. 3d 1184 2018 | | | zu:21885:P485J6LL } (affirming in part and reversing in part).] Existing scholarship on state data trespass laws has likewise focused primarily on the First Amndment and other Constitutional problems, and given little attention to the impairment of workers' rights under federal labor and employment law.^[ONE PREVIOUS PIECE ON THE NCPPA; NUMEROUS ARTICLES ON AG-GAG. MOSTLY FOCUSED ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES] 

This article aims to address this gap, offering guidance to courts in recognizing and avoiding conflicts between employees data trespass liability under state laws and employee protections under federal law. Focusing primarily on the NCPPA because of its broad application to all places of employment and explicit targeting of employee activity, I also note how such conflicts may arise under other states' data trespass statutes. To ensure that the prospect of costly litigation and damages does not penalize employees for, or deter them from, exercising their rights under federal law, I argue that pre-emption should apply to any state data trespass claims arising from employee conduct that is even arguably protected under federal law. 

