---
date: 15 June 2020 
path: /Drafts/DataTrespass-Draft.md

title: 'Workers Un-Gagged'
subtitle: 'Federal Labor Pre-Emption of State Data Trespass Laws'
header: 'Data Trespass and Labor Pre-Emption'

author:
  - name: Eric M. Fink
    position: Associate Professor of Law
    affiliation: Elon Law School 
    address: Greensboro, North Carolina
    email: efink@elon.edu
    thanks: 'Thanks to Elon Law student Rachel Stariha (J.D. 2018) for her valuable research assistance.'

abstract: The North Carolina Property Protection Act creates a civil cause of action against "Any person who intentionally gains access to the nonpublic areas of another's premises and engages in an act that exceeds the person's authority to enter those areas …". The statute specifically targets employees who engage in unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises. At least some of the employee activity subject to civil liability under these statutes is protected under federal labor and employment laws. The Supremacy Clause dictates that this conflict must be resolved in favor of federal law. To ensure that the prospect of costly litigation and damages does not penalize employees for, or deter them from, exercising their rights under federal law, pre-emption should apply to any NCPPA claims arising from employee conduct that is even arguably protected. 

keywords: ag-gag, data trespass, labor, preemption

epigraph:
  - text: Progress is born of agitation. It is agitation or stagnation.
    by: Eugene V. Debs
    source: The Issue (1908)

output:
  custom_document:
    path: DataTrespass-Draft.odt

---

# Introduction

The North Carolina Property Protection Act ("NCPPA")^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } ("NCPPA").] creates a civil cause of action against "Any person who intentionally gains access to the nonpublic areas of another's premises and engages in an act that exceeds the person's authority to enter those areas …".^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }.] The statute specifically targets employees who engage in unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises.^[ { | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }.]

While sometimes described as an "Ag-Gag" law,^[See, e.g., { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } (discussing the NCPPA as an example of second-wave Ag-Gag laws)], the NCPPA represents a new approach to state laws against data trespass,^[CITE FOR "DATA TRESPASS". In this article, I use the term data trespass to include both traditional Ag-Gag laws and broader state laws like the NCPPA and the Arkansas statute] i.e. entering and collecting data on private property without the owner's permission.^[Shortly after the enactment of the NCPPA, Arkansas adopted a nearly-identical statute. { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Another recent entrant to the data trespass field is Wyoming. See { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:YPRFJBFW } (imposing criminal liability); { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:J7AWHBBX } (imposing civil liability). The Wyoming statutes are sui generis, particularly in their specific targeting of "resource data" collection. _See_ { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:YPRFJBFW } § (h)(iii) and { | 2015 | | | zu:21885:J7AWHBBX } § (e)(iv) (defining "resource data" as "data relating to land or land use, including but not limited to data regarding agriculture, minerals, geology, history, cultural artifacts, archaeology, air, water, soil, conservation, habitat, vegetation or animal species.").] It differs from earlier Ag-Gag laws in three significant respects.^[See Part 2 (providing an overview of the NCPPA).] First, while Ag-Gag laws apply only to agricultural facilities,^[See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }, 1332 ], the NCPPA applies more broadly to any private property, regardless of the type of facility or operation.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } (imposing liability for unauthorized activity in "the nonpublic areas of another's premises", without limitation as to the nature or use of the property.). The Arkansas statute applies only to "commercial property", defined to include any "business property", "Agricultural or timber production operations", and "Residential property used for business purposes". { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 } 16-118-1131(a)(1).]. Second, while earlier Ag-Gag laws typically impose criminal liability for prohibited activity,^[See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }, 1332 ], the NCPPA permits the property owner to bring a civil action for trespass against those engaged in unauthorized data collection.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } ("NCPPA"); see also Arkansas { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }; { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } (distinguishing North Carolina & Arkansas statutes from previous Ag-Gag laws on this basis).] Third, unlike prevous Ag-Gag laws, the NCPPA exclusively targets unauthorized recording and other data collection by employees.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }; see also { | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Some earlier Ag-Gag statutes contain specific provisions aimed at so-called "employment fraud" for the purpose of gaining access to an agricultural facility. See, e.g., { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } (imposing liability on one who "Obtains employment with an agricultural production facility by force, threat, or misrepresentation with the intent to cause economic or other injury"), but otherwise generally apply to anyone engaged in the activities prohibited. See { | Center for Constitutional Rights, & Defending Rights & Dissent, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8GWTM8ET } 1-2, 10-11; { | Marceau, 2015 | | | zu:21885:EK4MRCTH }.]

This third distinctive feature of the NCPPA is the focus of this article. At least some of the employee activity subject to civil liability under the NCPPA is protected under federal labor and employment laws.^[See Part 3 (discussing protection under federal law of employee conduct subject to liability under the NCPPA and other state data trespass and Ag-Gag laws).] The Supremacy Clause dictates that this conflict must be resolved in favor of federal law under the pre-emption doctrine.^[See Part 4 (reviewing pre-emption of state law under federal labor and employment law).]

The NCPPA and other data trespass laws have faced legal challenges, primarily on Constitutional grounds.^[{ | People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals v. Stein, 737 Fed. Appx. 122 2018 | | | zu:21885:RC55NET5 } reversing and remanding { | People for Ethical Treatment of Animals v. Stein, 259 F. Supp. 3d 369 2017 | | | zu:21885:QIKJR77V }; see also { | Animal League Defense Fund v. Vaught, Dist. Court, 2020 | | | zu:21885:TS9ZMS4R } (Arkansas data trespass)). An appeal from the dismissal of the Arkansas is currently pending. Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Vaught, No. 20-1538 (8th Cir. filed March 16, 2020) { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Kelly, 2020 WL 362626 2020 | | | zu:21885:R9QDV5WY } (Kansas Ag-Gag) { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Reynolds, 297 F. Supp. 3d 901 2018 | | | zu:21885:BFGPTVNS } (Iowa Ag-Gag); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Wasden, 878 F. 3d 1184 2018 | | | zu:21885:P485J6LL } (Idaho Ag-Gag); { | Western Watersheds Project v. Michael, 869 F. 3d 1189 2017 | | | zu:21885:58AV2WSQ } (Wyoming data trespass); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Herbert, 263 F. Supp. 3d 1193 Dist. Court, 2017 | | | zu:21885:TJAF5D6J } (Utah Ag-Gag).] However, the courts in those cases have not addressed the issue of federal pre-emption.^[In { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter, 118 F. Supp. 3d 1195 2015 | | | zu:21885:BA3FE9UI }, the plaintiffs asserted that the Idaho Ag-Gag statute was pre-empted under non-labor federal law. See Complaint at 46-48 (asserting pre-emption under the False Claims Act, Food Safety & Modernization Act, and Clean Water Act.). On appeal, an amicus brief by the United Farm Workers union argued that the statute would undermine employee protections under federal law. UFW Amicus Brief at 7-29.  Another amicus brief by the Idaho Building Trades Council and state AFL-CIO specifically argued for pre-emption under the NLRA. { | anon. Amicus Curae Brief of the Idaho Building Trades Council and the Idaho AFL-CIO, in Support of Appellee and for Affirmance, 2016 | | | zu:21885:JI4EU8UK } at 4-13. However, neither the District Court nor the Court of Appeals reached these issues. See { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Otter, 118 F. Supp. 3d 1195 2015 | | | zu:21885:BA3FE9UI } (granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiffs on other grounds); { | Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Wasden, 878 F. 3d 1184 2018 | | | zu:21885:P485J6LL } (affirming in part and reversing in part).] Existing scholarship on state data trespass laws has likewise focused primarily on the First Amndment and other Constitutional problems, and given little attention to the impairment of workers' rights under federal labor and employment law.^[ONE PREVIOUS PIECE ON THE NCPPA; NUMEROUS ARTICLES ON AG-GAG. MOSTLY FOCUSED ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES] 

This article aims to address this gap, offering guidance to courts in recognizing and avoiding conflicts between employees data trespass liability under state laws and employee protections under federal law. Focusing primarily on the NCPPA because of its broad application to all places of employment and explicit targeting of employee activity, I also note how such conflicts may arise under other states' data trespass statutes. To ensure that the prospect of costly litigation and damages does not penalize employees for, or deter them from, exercising their rights under federal law, I argue that pre-emption should apply to any state data trespass claims arising from employee conduct that is even arguably protected under federal law. 

# The North Carolina Property Protection Act 

The North Carolina Property Protection Act ("NC PPA")^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }] provides that,

> Any person who intentionally gains access to the nonpublic areas of another's premises and engages in an act that exceeds the person's authority to enter those areas is liable to the owner or operator of the premises for any damages sustained".^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }] 
 
The statute defines "nonpublic areas" as "those areas not accessible to or not intended to be accessed by the general public."^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }] It also enumerates specific types of conduct constituting "an act that exceeds a person's authority to enter the nonpublic areas of another's premises", of which the first three expressly pertain to recording, photography, and other data collection by employees:  

> (1) An employee who enters the nonpublic areas of an employer's premises for a reason other than a bona fide intent of seeking or holding employment or doing business with the employer and thereafter without authorization captures or removes the employer's data, paper, records, or any other documents and uses the information to breach the person's duty of loyalty to the employer.
>
> (2) An employee who intentionally enters the nonpublic areas of an employer's premises for a reason other than a bona fide intent of seeking or holding employment or doing business with the employer and thereafter without authorization records images or sound occurring within an employer's premises and uses the recording to breach the person's duty of loyalty to the employer.
>
> (3) Knowingly or intentionally placing on the employer's premises an unattended camera or electronic surveillance device and using that device to record images or data.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } . The two other enumerated acts ("Conspiring in organized retail theft" and "An act that substantially interferes with the ownership or possession of real property") are not limited to employees and do not raise the pre-emption concerns that are the focus here.] 

The statutory language here is not a model of clarity: 

- What does "a bona fide intent of seeking or holding employment or doing business with the employer" mean? 
- Does "a reason other than a bona fide intent ..." mean only where the employee lacks any bona fide intent, or does it also include situations where the employee has mixed motives? 
- Use of information or recording "to breach the person's duty of loyalty to the employer"
    - Yet the statute does not define "duty of loyalty", a significant omission as it is doubtful that North Carolina law imposes a general duty of loyalty on employees.^[See { | Dalton v. Camp, 353 N.C. 647 2001 | | | zu:21885:48KHTCDS } at 653.] Under North Carolina law, employees do not generally owe fiduciary duties to their employers.^[See { | Dalton v. Camp, 353 N.C. 647 2001 | | | zu:21885:48KHTCDS } at 708.] absent "some unusual set of facts" establishing an employee's "superiority and influence" over their employer^[{ | Austin Maintenance v. Crowder Const., 742 SE 2d 535 court.appeals, 2012 | | | zu:21885:TUEL6EYM }]

The NC PPA is currently the subject of a pre-enforcement legal challenge.^[CITE PETA v. STEIN. In footnote, mention challenges to other statutes. Mostly on 1st Amendment grounds. IDAHO PLAINTIFFS ALSO ASSERTED PRE-EMPTION UNDER FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL STATUTES. BUT THE DISTRICT COURT DIDN'T ADDRESS THE PRE-EMPTION ISSUE, AND THE PLAINTIFFS DID NOT PURSUE IT ON APPEAL.]

NC CASE. DISTRICT COURT DISMISSED FOR LACK OF STANDING. 4TH CIRCUIT REVERSED, HOLDING THAT THE CHILLING EFFECT OF A POTENTIAL LAWSUIT WAS SUFFICIENT TO SATISFY THE INJURY-IN-FACT REQUIREMENT. CASE REMAINS PENDING ON REMAND. 

# The NCPPA Subjects Employees to Liability for Conduct that is Protected Under Federal Labor & Employment Laws

The NCPPA expressly targets employee activity.^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF }; see also @{ | 2017 | | | zu:21885:RSQBADU5 }. Some Ag-Gag statutes also specifically apply to employee activity. See CITES. Others would implicitly apply to employees engaged in the types of activity generally subject to liability. CITES.] Most notably, this includes unauthorized recording or other data collection on the employer's premises. It may also include communications and publicity about working conditions, and union "salting". These activities are (at least in some circumstances) protected under federal labor and employment law.

NOTE EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN WORKERS FROM STATUTORY DEFINITION OF "EMPLOYEE" UNDER NLRA, FLSA, AND OTHER FEDERAL LAWS. As the name suggests, Ag-Gag laws apply only to agricultural facilities. However, the statutes typically define agricultural facilities in broad terms to include not just farms but also other operations along the production, processing, and distribution chain.^[The Idaho statute, for example, applies to "any structure or land … that is being used for agricultural production," which includes "Construction, expansion, use, maintenance and repair of an agricultural production facility," "Processing and packaging agricultural products, including the processing and packaging of agricultural products into food and other agricultural commodities," and "Manufacturing animal feed," along with activity more directly connected to raising crops and animals. { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } §§ 18-7042(2)(a) & (b) (defining "Agricultural production" and "Agricultural production facility"). See also { | 2002 | | | zu:21885:LWIYUCX5 }; { | 2004 | | | zu:21885:G5BMRLNT }; { | 2006 | | | zu:21885:MQTF7G4J }; { | 2012 | | | zu:21885:RMYY566N }; { | 2012 | | | zu:21885:X8E4LY7G }.]

## Protected Activity Under the NLRA

The NLRA protects "the right to self-organization, to form, join or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purposes of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection …."^[{ | 1935 | | | zu:21885:RE4VMPJN } sec. 157.] 

### Recording & Other Data Collection

Protected concerted activity may include taking photos or making audio or video recordings of conditions, communications, or events in the workplace. An employer may not adopt broad rules prohibiting or requiring permission for such activity.^[{ | Whole Foods Market, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 87 2015 | | | zu:21885:KALDMEZA }; { | T-Mobile, USA, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 171 2016 | | | zu:21885:LCUJNFWM }; { | Caesars Entertainment d/b/a Rio All-Suites Hotel & Casino, 362 N.L.R.B. No. 190 2015 | | | zu:21885:NXLTWSCV }; { | White Oak Manor, 353 N.L.R.B. 795 2009 | | | zu:21885:D3FI25HF }, fn. 2, 798-799 (finding that photography was part of the res gestae of employee's protected concerted activity in documenting inconsistent enforcement of employer dress code); { | Sullivan, Long & Hagerty, 303 N.L.R.B. 1007 1991 | | | zu:21885:SNEU99KV }, 1013 (finding employee's use of tape recorder in workplace to aid federal government investigation to be protected).] Employers may adopt and enforce more narrowly-tailored rules to protect other legally-recognized interests.^[@{ | Flagstaff Medical Center, Inc., 357 N.L.R.B. 659 2011 | | | zu:21885:C2CHH39V } (holding rule prohibiting "use of cameras for recording images of patients and/or hospital equipment, property, or facilities" did not unlawfully restrain or chill employees in the exercise of their Section 7 rights, where employer "has a significant interest in preventing the wrongful disclosure of individually identifiable health information" to protect patient privacy.] 

Determining whether an employer's rule is sufficiently-tailored or unduly-broad is precisely the sort of question that federal labor pre-emption declares to be exclusively the province of the NLRB and the federal courts. State law may not authorize employers to impose restrictions that restrain or interfere with protected concerted activity under the NLRA. Nor may state courts, whether in a civil or criminal action under a state data trespass law, adjudicate whether an employer's rule is overbroad under the NLRA. 

Employees may also use "surreptitious" or otherwise unauthorized recordings as evidence in administrative or judicial proceedings to vindicate their legal rights.^[{ | Whole Foods Market, Inc., 363 N.L.R.B. No. 87 2015 | | | zu:21885:KALDMEZA }, citing { | Times-Herald Record, 334 N.L.R.B. 350 2001 | | | zu:21885:MMDEZY8V }, 354; { | Painting Co., 330 N.L.R.B. 1000 2000 | | | zu:21885:I5VJYWVJ }, 1003; { | Arrow Flint Electric Co., 321 N.L.R.B. 1208 1996 | | | zu:21885:BFU9X8WX }, 1219; { | Wellstream Corp., 313 N.L.R.B. 698 1994 | | | zu:21885:TVZKM4WQ }, 711; { | McAllister Bros., 278 N.L.R.B. 601 1986 | | | zu:21885:N7889KP7 }, fn. 2, 605 fn. 3; { | Algreco Sportswear Co., 271 N.L.R.B. 499 1984 | | | zu:21885:LE7HHA5C }}, 505; { | East Belden Corp., 239 N.L.R.B. 776 1978 | | | zu:21885:HRG3Q7VN }, 782; { | California Acrylic Industries, Inc., 322 N.L.R.B. 41 1996 | | | zu:21885:TTELRVFT }.] 

### Communication with Co-Workers & Public

Employees under the NLRA also have a right to communicate with co-workers and the public about working conditions and disputes.^[{ | Albertsons, Inc., 351 N.L.R.B. 254 2007 | | | zu:21885:SWRLLWB5 }; { | Kinder-Care Learning Centers, Inc., 299 N.L.R.B. 1171 1990 | | | zu:21885:MM6TUGEB }.] 

### Salting

The NCPPA imposes liability on unauthorized data collection or recording by "An employee who enters the nonpublic areas of an employer's premises _for a reason other than a bona fide intent of seeking or holding employment_ or doing business with the employer."^[{ | NC Property Protection Act, 2015 | | | zu:21885:9BQD5SVF } (b)(1) & (2) (emphasis supplied).] Some Ag-Gag laws similarly target those who gain entry to the premises under the guise of seeking employment.^[See, e.g., { | 2014 | | | zu:21885:T6BV2SCG } (imposing liability on one who "Obtains employment with an agricultural production facility by force, threat, or misrepresentation with the intent to cause economic or other injury").] 

Such "employment fraud" provisions could be construed to apply to union "salts", union members who take jobs at non-union workplaces with the aim of organizing the employees.^[See { | Dall, & Cohen, 2002 | | | zu:21885:G4RJX5EZ }; see also { | Forman, 2017 | | | zu:21885:AEIRA4CW } (reviewing the history and practice of salting and describing the author's own experience as a salt); { | Walsh, 2016 | | | zu:21885:S65JNTE5 }.] Salts sometimes identify themselves as union members and organizers when applying for jobs,^[See, e.g., { | Aerotek, Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 2018 | | | zu:21885:AQRQ4WQN }; { | Fluor Daniel, Inc., 311 N.L.R.B. 498 1993 | | | zu:21885:GNA2MHY7 }.] but sometimes keep their affiliation and motive covert.^[See, e.g., { | Lam, 2016 | | | zu:21885:DVGDFWUW } (describing experience as a covert salt).] In the latter circumstance, the employer may very well regard the concealment as a misrepresentation. Employers wishing to avoid unions no doubt regard salting as harmful to their economic interests.^[The view that salting is a devious practice causing economic harm to employers is reflected in a congressional hearing on alleged "salting abuses". { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP }. In his opening statement, subcommittee chair Rep. Sam Johnson contended that "Certain unions use 'salts' to cause deliberate harm to businesses by increasing their costs and forcing them to spend time, energy, and money to defend themselves against frivolous charges, and sometimes, to run employers out of business." { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP } at 2. A parade of employer witnesses then gave  anguished testimony about the alleged harms they suffered as a result of salting campaigns. { | anon. Examining Union Salting Abuses and Organizing Tactics That Harm the U.S. Economy, 2004 | | | zu:21885:G7WNMTAP } at ??. In similar vein, a "Fact Sheet" in support of proposed legislation to outlaw salting, issued by a prominent anti-union organization, decried the practice as "an organized conspiracy on the part of Big Labor bosses" and "an instrument of economic destruction aimed at non-union companies". { | National Right to Work Committee, 2003 | | | zu:21885:PQP98FXM } at ??. See also, { | Johnson, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8S6SZKI9 } (discussing legislative efforts to reverse Town & Country and outlaw salting).] 

 Employee protections under the NLRA apply to those engaged in salting,^[{ | NLRB v. Town & Country Elec., Inc., 516 U.S. 85 1995 | | | zu:21885:Q84NCT42 } (holding job applicants' motive in seeking employment as part of union salting campaign did not deprive them of protection as statutory employee under NLRA)], whether overt or covert,^[CITES] as long as they are "genuinely interested in seeking to establish an employment relationship with the employer."^[{ | Toering Electric Co., 351 N.L.R.B. 225 2007 | | | zu:21885:VKGU4EEG }; see also { | Johnson, 2017 | | | zu:21885:8S6SZKI9 } (discussing narrowed protection for salts under Toering Electric and Oil Capitol Sheet Metal)] MIGHT BE OK IF LIABILITY UNDER NCPPA & OTHER STATE LAWS IS LIMITED TO THOSE WHO OBTAIN EMPLOYMENT FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF CAUSING INJURY, OR WITH NO BONA FIDE INTEREST IN THE JOB ITSELF. NOTE AMBIGUITY IN LANGUAGE OF NCPPA. 

There might still be problems in relation to other federal employment laws. For example, the use of "tester" applicants is a common practice for identifying discriminatory hiring practices. CITES COURTS HAVE UPHELD THE PRACTICE EVEN WHERE THE TESTERS HAVE NO REAL INTEREST IN THE JOB.] BUT AS WRITTEN, THESE STATUTES AT LEAST PLAUSIBLY COVER THOSE WITH MIXED MOTIVES, WHO WOULD BE REGARDED AS STATUTORY EMPLOYEES UNDER THE NLRA. THIS IS PARTICULARLY TRUE OF THE NORTH CAROLINA STATUTE, WHICH EXPLICITLY IDENTIFIES THOSE SUBJECT TO LIABILITY AS "EMPLOYEES" AND FURTHER PREDICATES THEIR LIABILITY ON USE OF THE INFORMATION OR RECORDING "TO BREACH THE PERSON'S DUTY OF LOYALTY TO THE EMPLOYER". 

## Protected Activity Under Other Federal Employment Laws 

Ag-gag and data trespass statutes also raise concerns under other federal employment laws. By impairing the ability of employees to document workplace conditions and activity, these state laws severely undermine the enforcement of federal laws against health and safety hazards, discrimination, wage theft, and other harmful and abusive employment practices. Employers are hardly likely to grant employees permission to collect evidence of such violations, and may very well attempt to cover up the problems if alerted that employees are planning to do so. Consequently, employees must frequently act without the employer's knowledge and consent.^[UFW Amicus Brief] 

Protection for employee recording and data collection under FLSA, OSHA, Title VII, etc. Anti-retaliation provisions. 


# Federal Pre-emption

Lorem ipsum. 

## NLRA Pre-Emption

The pre-emptive sweep of federal labor law is particularly broad.^[{ | San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236 1959 | | | zu:21885:ABU98E47 }] State law may not regulate any activity that is arguably protected or prohibited under the NLRA.^[{ | Machinists v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Commn, 427 U.S. 132 1976 | | | zu:21885:S3P4WMWW }; { | San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236 1959 | | | zu:21885:ABU98E47 }] 

Pre-emption applies to state laws imposing criminal liability on employees for activity that is either protected or prohibited under the NLRA.^[CITES] It likewise applies to state law civil claims by employers against employees based on such activity.^[CITES]

As a threshold matter, federal labor pre-emption would only arise in cases involving statutory employees under the NLRA. Most notably, the NLRA's definition of "employee" excludes "any individual employed as an agricultural laborer".^[{ | 1935 | | | zu:21885:RE4VMPJN } § 152(3).] However, the "agricultural laborer" exclusion under the NLRA has been narrowly construed to apply only to DEFINITION.^[CITE.] In contrast, ag-gag laws define agricultural facilities more broadly, to include TYPES OF WORK.^[CITES.] Consequently, the NLRA protects at least some employees subject to liability under state ag-gag laws.^[CITE CASES UNDER NLRA INVOLVING FOOD PROCESSING, DELIVERY, MAINTENANCE, ETC. WORKERS] Other exclusions from NLRA coverage might apply to certain employees facing liability under the broader data trespass statutes.^[For instance, the NLRA excludes DOMESTIC WORKERS]

Thus, to the extent that state data trespass laws impose civil or criminal liability, or otherwise restrict, activity that is protected under the NLRA, federal labor pre-emption would apply.

## Pre-Emption Under Other Federal Employment Laws

Admissibility in agency actions and employee suits of recordings made or evidence otherwise collected without the employer's permission. The Wyoming statutes state that data collected in violation of those statutes is inadmissible in any proceeding. ANY OTHER AG-GAG STATUTES HAVE SIMILAR PROVISIONS? Even without such an explicit exlusionary provision, other ag-gag and data trespass statutes would have the practical effect of deterring employees from using unauthorized workplace recordings as evidence of employment law violations and subjecting them to criminal or civil liability for doing so. 

# Conclusion 

Courts should dismiss suits on pre-emption grounds. The NLRB should seek injunctive relief and hold employers liable for unfair labor practices, consistent with established law. Legislatures should stop writing statutes that are illegal. 